From Genesis chapter 49, verse 8 through 12, Judah, your brothers shall praise you.
Your hands shall be on the neck of your enemies.
Your father's son shall bow down before you.
Judah is a lion's cub.
From the prey, my son, you have gone up.
He stooped down, he crouched as a lion, and as a lioness, who dares rouse him.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff from between his feet, until tribute comes to him, and to him shall be the obedience of the peoples.
Buying in his fold to the vine, in his donkey's colt, to the choice vine,
He has washed his garments and wine and his vesture in the blood of grapes.
His eyes are darker than wine, and his teeth wider than milk.
The grass withers and the flowers fade, but the word of our God will stand forever, and may he be seated.
Pray with me, merciful God in heaven.
We give you thanks for your word.
When your words like this that seem mysterious and confusing, I pray that your spirit would speak to us, that you would encourage and strengthen our hearts as we consider and meditate on your holy word.
But you give to your people not to confuse us, but that we might find life and truth in you.
I pray that you'd help us accomplish this morning in your name we pray, amen.
You know, there are certain moments in life when all the broken things of this world kind of fade into the background and you just experience beauty, glory, joy.
I think one of those moments for a lot of people can be when they get married.
It's this transcendent moment before these people and there's feasting, there's joy, there's laughter.
You're not the one getting married when you get to attend a wedding and you know the people well and it's this joyous moment and kind of the pains in life kind of fade away for a second and you just get to experience joy and beauty.
But anyone who's been married knows that marriage is more than just a moment of a wedding.
It's life together.
And pretty soon you move, go from this wedding feast to ordinary life, an ordinary life with anybody is challenging.
And oftentimes when I'll do premarital counseling, I warn people of this truth.
I'll tell them, hey, the weddings are awesome.
Enjoy every moment of it.
Just soak it up.
Even if things don't go right, it's fine.
No one will remember that.
But just so you know, the day after,
It can be hard.
That evening can be difficult for you.
As soon as you move from like this wedding feast to just life together, it can be challenging.
And oftentimes the first fights, big fights happen on the honeymoon.
From the ordinary things of like, oh, this is how you squeeze your toothpaste tube?
I was like, I don't like that.
Wish that would have come up earlier.
So the whole toilet seat thing, to the way they chew their food, to the way they load their dishes, which, you know, there's all right and wrong ways to load dishwashers.
And you discover your spouse does it the wrong way, you know, pretty quick in the marriage.
And so it doesn't take long for that bliss of marriage to turn into irritation.
And I think this is a kind of a microcosm of how we experience life.
Life in general, moments of beauty, moments of transcendence, moments where love kind of breaks in, moments where there's joy and glory.
where you experience the kindness of somebody, even just the beauty of the sunset and the glory of creation.
There's these moments in life where all your, the pains and sorrows that we experience all the time can kind of fade into the background.
But on this side of a sunset is darkness and this side of joy can be pain, disappointment, resentment.
Like the, the beauty that we experience in this life is that kind of thing that you, you can't like fully grasp.
It's the vapor, it's mist that you can,
You can have for a moment, but it's just a moment and you experience the frustration of living life in this kind of world of a world where there is an innate brokenness that touches everything, that our world is utterly tainted with the sin of Adam, which is our sin as well.
like this disobedience of God that impacts every part of life from our own hearts to our relationships with others, to even the creation that we live in, everything is a war with itself.
And Genesis is this book as we come to the end that tells the story of our world.
It tells you how this world got to be problematic for us.
And not just like where this problem comes from,
But also, because we're born in the image of God, it tells us why we're so frustrated with the world the way it is, because we know it's not supposed to be so frustrating.
It's not supposed to be so hard, but yet it is, because the sin is into the world.
But the story doesn't stop there, even from the beginning.
In Genesis 3, when the curse gets spoken to humanity, to Adam and Eve, we also get a profound promise.
Not only does Genesis tell us the problem with this world,
And our frustration with this world, where that comes from, but it also tells us solution is that one will come.
One will come and he will crush the head of the serpent.
He will free this world of all its darkness.
He will renew all things.
This serpent crusher is coming.
And that promise that was in Genesis three, that Missy on the promise is actually picked up again here in Genesis chapter 49.
In many ways, the book of Genesis is bookended with this messianic promise that God has not forgotten His promise to bring about the renewal of all things.
He's still bringing about that future and now it's narrowed down its lens showing us that future is actually going to come through Judah.
The last messianic promise here at the end of Genesis, God has not forgotten.
He will renew
our broken world, he will crush Satan.
And this will happen through Judah and his family, which already shows us that this is, I mean, this is, Genesis chapter 49 is particularly a challenging chapter to understand, but this one point that everyone agrees on in chapter 49 is that this is messianic.
This section we just read is all about the one, not Judah,
It's talking about things that he couldn't possibly accomplish.
It's about the one that's gonna come through the line of Judah, which is Jesus himself.
The God is gonna fulfill his promise to Eve that he will crush the serpent, that he will end sins tyranny in our world, bringing lasting joy.
This is our hope.
So as we dive into this morning, for many of you, if not most of you, if not all of you, what I'm gonna say this morning won't be particularly new for you.
But there are things that we need to constantly keep reminding ourselves of, that hope does win, that sin does not win, that glory, that beauty of Christ will endure forever.
And so this morning, we're going to meditate on the person of Jesus.
And what this tells us about Jesus, that how can Jesus do all these things and renew this world because of who He is?
And there's three aspects of the nature of Christ that I think that this points to, that we need to help renew our hopes in our own day.
And there are these.
One, that Jesus is God.
Second, that Jesus is the Lion King God.
And third, that Jesus is God, the crucified Lion King.
And so, if you're a note taker, you could just write the last sentence down.
I'm kinda just building on that one sentence, adding
fun adjectives along the way but the final word being Jesus is God the crucified Lion King.
So first as we consider how this reveals who Jesus is the first thing we discover is that Jesus the one who's coming that this is pointing to is God.
Jesus is God.
Again as a side note just to point out many commentators will say that Genesis 49 is not only
the most difficult chapter to understand in Genesis or in the Old Testament, which if you've ever read like Isaiah or Jeremiah, you know there's lots of confusing parts of the Old Testament.
People will say this is the most challenging chapter in all of scripture to fully understand its poetic nature.
Some of the things that brings up, it's the first time they're brought up in scriptures.
And it's about this kind of near prophetic promise to Judah and his family, but it's also
fulfillment that's going to be carried out generations later.
So there's all sorts of layers and imagery happening here.
But there are a few things that are very clear, like I mentioned, that this section is about Jesus, the one that's going to come through the line of Judah.
It's about this messianic promise that there is a Messiah that's going to come.
It's going to rescue and redeem his people.
And this Messiah is not an ordinary person.
He's not just another prophet in the line, but he is
divine.
And we see that here right at the beginning.
This verse 8 says, Judah, your brothers shall praise you.
So this word praise here is not an ordinary kind of praising like, hey, you did a really good job.
Good job, buddy.
It's not that kind of praise.
This is a word that's actually reserved nearly exclusively, like 99.9% of the time it's reserved for the person
for God himself, for Yahweh.
This is not a word it's used for humans.
Sure, Judah does become the prominent tribe amongst his kin.
His kingdom is the strongest and longest lasting.
But this is clearly speaking to more than just that, as this is a word reserved for God, this is poetically saying, listen, not Judah, you are God.
But it's poetically telling us that one will come from your line, who is God, who is, who is praised like goddess, who carries a messianic promise.
Even the temptation of Jesus that was just read earlier, you saw that God alone can have glory and honor and praise and worship.
This is what this is talking about.
That worship is going to come for a descendant of Judah, who is worthy of praise because he is God.
This is the messianic promise coming to the future showing us that the one that's going to come in the line of Judah is God himself.
And you see this again that the father's sons bow down.
Again, that's worship language.
And it's doing a couple of things for one.
I think in our heads it brings up this Joseph dreams kind of resurfacing that Joseph has said his brothers would bow down to him.
But this is in the context of this praise, this divine worship kind of praise.
This is deeper than what happened to Joseph.
And we see this kind of developing here throughout the end when we see like all these nations and tribes are going to come and obey and bow down and praise this descendant.
This is big.
It's global.
It's about worship.
Let's reserve for God himself.
This is saying that that's going to happen to the one that comes from your line, Judah.
And remember,
Jacob's blessings to his sons are not just ordinary blessings that you might give.
If you knew you were about to die, they'd call your children next to you and say, hey, man, the Lord be with you and also with you.
This isn't like those kind of blessings.
This is prophetic.
He's telling them what their future will be.
This is not a maybe.
I hope you have a good life.
There's a few hundred bucks.
This is, no, this is your future.
And actually, we see this clearly pointing to Jesus, I think,
and his triumphal entry on Palm Sunday.
Already some of the imagery in here might have made you think about Palm Sunday when Jesus rides into Jerusalem the week before his crucifixion.
And people, what do they do?
They praise him.
They lay down palms and they lay down their cloaks in front of him.
He is riding what?
A donkey.
And you get some of this imagery in here that you see a donkey here.
And that image of the donkey actually grows throughout the Old Testament.
You find kings riding donkeys to the coronation.
So get some of these loose themes start to find their point throughout Scripture, not only in that, but this praise.
You remember when Jesus rides in his donkey in Jerusalem on Palm Sunday, the people are praising him, Hosanna, Hosanna, right?
The praise in him has God.
And what are the Pharisees of religious leaders of that day that get super uncomfortable with it, which makes sense?
They don't know that Jesus has got himself.
They don't know he's worthy of this praise.
And they say, hey, man, have these people stop.
And what does Jesus say?
If I tell them to stop, the rocks are going to cry out.
Like the creation knows who I am.
They are here to praise me.
He is worthy of praise as God himself.
As a descendant of Judah, he is the fulfillment of this promise.
On Palm Sunday, this is what we see the fulfillment of this.
The brothers falling down and worship.
As you see all the people on the street, worshiping Jesus, as he just rides into the town, this is the brothers bowing down.
One from Judah's line being praised by all the other tribes being praised as God because he is God.
Which means he's not coming to merely just to be praised, but to end corruption.
He's worthy of the praise that we give him, which means he's capable of doing all the things that we praise him for, to right every wrong.
He can actually carry the messianic promises because he is God himself.
He cannot fail in his task.
He has come to deliver us, to make all things new.
And Jesus can do this because he's not merely a man.
He's not just a great man.
He's not just the best of man.
He is the God man.
The one who
brought all things into being in creation, can recreate again because he has the power to do it.
And this praise here shows us the nature of who he is, that he has got himself.
It's the first thing we see here in this promise that Jesus is God.
And this goes on to show us what kind of God he is.
And next thing we see is kind of the strength and the scope of
of who this God is.
And this is the second thing we find that not only is Jesus God, but Jesus is the Lion King God.
Jesus is the Lion King God.
We see this here in verse nine to 10.
It says, Judah is a lion's cub.
From the prey, my son, you've gone up.
He stooped down.
He crouched as a lion and as a lioness who dares, aroused him.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff from between his feet until tribute comes to him.
To him shall be the obedience of the peoples."
So this image kind of shifts to this image of this beast and this kingdom.
And the first thing we see here is this lion's cub, which is obviously a young lion that's rising in its strength and power.
And this is the first time you actually get reference of lions in Scripture, which is interesting.
It's known as an animal, right, that's strong.
a symbolic of kingship, and it says he's gone up from the prey.
This is perhaps an allusion to Judah's own life where he was found in profound sin as he slept with his daughter-in-law, but he repented.
And he has one that left the prey of sin.
This could be a reference that I would lean towards that.
And it says, who dares rouse him?
It's like he's just cubbed this growing into strength, this symbol of power, the symbol of strength and saying, this scepter shall not part.
And it's talking about this ruler staff.
Both of these things are signs that speak to the scope and strength of this kingdom, that this kingdom is an unending kingdom.
Like the scepter, the sign of your power is going to pass on from generation to generation without end.
It's powerful.
Even this line about the
verse 10 that the ruler's staff won't from between his feet until the tribute comes.
It's the speaking of the fertility, most likely that's the image that's referring to the fertility of the kingdom, that he's always going to be able to pass that fertility on from one king to the next.
That a king will always sit on this throne from this family.
It'll be strong, it'll be an enduring kingdom.
And actually early, the near history
The early years have seemed fulfilled naturally.
I mean, David, King David, who comes from the line of Judah, he sits on this throne, he grows the kingdom and it's very successful.
And he gets his own covenant with the Lord.
And the Lord comes to him and makes a covenant with him that says, your throne is going to be forever and ever.
It's a powerful thing.
It's doubling down.
It's speaking back to this.
It's speaking this promise back in a covenant form to David.
And then David's son, Solomon sits on the throne, and he expands, and he's wealthy.
And for around 400 years, they had someone sitting on the throne until when?
Until they sinned grievously against the Lord, and the Lord brought the kingdom out of Judah, out of southern Israel, put them into exile and Babylon.
And the question of them, people, when they're in exile, the question of the prophets who are speaking to God's people in exile was always this.
It's like, who's gonna sit in the throne of David?
Who's gonna sit on that throne?
It was always a question of fulfillment.
Will God actually fulfill his promise?
Will he keep his promises?
And this is where this is ultimately the scope is more than just his near descendant, but it's pointing to what Jesus was trying to fulfill.
what Jesus did fulfill when he was born.
Jesus got in the flesh.
He comes through the line of Judah.
So tribe he's born into.
And as he comes, Revelation five makes this point clear for us as it calls him what?
The lion of the tribe of Judah.
Jesus is the fulfillment of this promise from Jacob to Judah.
It was all pointing and longing for Jesus, the Messiah to come.
He is the man.
strong, mighty, able to sit on this throne forever.
It's a throne that he is still sitting on right now in this moment.
And the scope of this throne of Judah is much bigger than just the throne in Jerusalem that David once sat on.
It's a global throne.
But the throne that Jesus comes to sit on is the fulfillment of what Jerusalem was always meant to be.
It was never meant to be its own kingdom to itself.
It was always meant to spread and expand, which is the promise to Abraham, to God would bless his family.
They would bless the families of the earth that goes back to the Garden of Eden.
The Adam and Eve, their whole goal, their whole command was to be fruitful, multiply, which actually expand the garden until it covers the earth.
This is what Jesus is doing now.
Growing his kingdom until it covers the earth, Israel as a nation,
was always a shadow of the fulfillment that's found in the church.
God is calling all peoples to Himself.
And you see this here at the end of verse 10, these tributes that are coming to Him and the obedience of the peoples, that's beyond just Jewish peoples, that's all the peoples coming to Him.
All the peoples come to Him.
This is a prophetic promise to Judah to show us who Jesus is and what He's come to do.
That Jesus is God.
that he's come to bring all creation under his authority, back under his protection as the Lion King, to expand his kingdom until it covers the earth and renews all creation.
Right, just as a king is domain and people in it, so Jesus has people in it and he's building that kingdom until it covers the earth.
And as God, he is the one who can actually do this.
He isn't bringing just temporary renewal, just those
moments of beauty and glory, He's bringing that to bear to the ends of the earth.
Jesus is God and He is God the Lion King, who's come strong and mighty to expand His kingdom in this earth.
So maybe at least another question could be this, is how is He able to actually accomplish this?
How is He accomplishing this in this world?
Because clearly
this kind of level fulfillment has not yet happened yet.
We have all sorts of struggles and our moments of beauty don't last.
So how is this actually happening in this world?
And I think we see this in this last set of images here where we find that Jesus is God the crucified Lion King.
Jesus is God the crucified Lion King.
Look with me back here, verse 11.
Says,
vine in his donkey's colt to the choice vine.
He washed his garments and wine and his vestures and the blood of grapes.
So this imagery kind of shifts again from this praise glorifying this divine kind of worship setting to this kingdom, Kingly conversation to this last imagery of vines and grapes, which is really imagery of abundance.
Look, you see this donkey tied to the choices of vines.
The reason why you wouldn't normally want to do this, because if you tied a donkey to choice of vines, what's that donkey going to do?
It's going to eat all the vines.
And you don't want to waste your choice of vines.
But this is speaking to the abundance.
Like, I don't even care if my donkey eats the nicest of my things.
It doesn't matter.
I got so much abundance.
This is what this is.
He's so prosperous.
He doesn't care.
So wealthy.
He uses his finest grapes to do what?
To wash his cloak.
Which, and never mind the fact that that probably would make it more dirty.
Let's just throw that out for a second.
It's an insane thing to use your choices, your most expensive things to do that.
It'd be like buying a bunch of Evion water, which I don't know if that's the most expensive water.
It's the most expensive water someone like me can think of.
And using that to like wash your car with, right?
Be ridiculous.
It'd be utterly wasteful.
That's the kind of abundance and wealth that is being talked about.
There's so much abundance.
There's just wastefulness.
Like I've been doing a lot of traveling last couple of weeks.
And sometimes when I travel, I'll watch some of the dumb movies when I get too tired to read or try to work.
And I know you all do it too.
So don't look at me with those judgy eyes.
We watch those dumb, dumb, dumb movies.
And one of these movies, you know, this family's so wealthy that they go to this hotel and there's no place for them.
And so the wife calls her husband and they buy the hotel.
You know, why?
Because they need a place to stay.
They want to let them stay.
They're so fine.
I'll just buy the hotel and then you're going to have a place for me to stay.
It's that kind of level of wealth and abundance that is just outside our, our even imagination is kind of what's being shown here.
Abundance.
But there's a second layer that even adds, I think another dimension to this abundance that we see.
And it's that this is called like the blood of, of grapes on this cloak.
It's another image where blood on garments is not a neutral image.
There's multiple things happening, just like in good poetry.
There's always multiple dimensions happening by certain images.
And I think you see this that Joseph's cloak was stained with blood, the blood of goats, by Judas Hand.
This is being brought back up again further in context of this abundance of these grapes,
Blood itself is more of a limited resource, isn't it?
Like you only have so much in your body, and if you lose too much, you're gonna die.
You don't have unlimited blood.
So what's this connection between this abundance and this grapes and this blood of grapes?
And I think the fulfillment that happens throughout the Old Testament and the prophets help us understand these images more clearly.
And this is just true of any kind of interpretation grid.
If you wanna understand what the Bible's saying,
Typically, you look at other places in the Bible that use the same language and it helps you understand it.
And in Isaiah, the coming Savior is one whose robes are stained, the one who becomes a sacrifice for his people.
He enters into the suffering of the people, the Lion King, full of strength and power and wealth and abundance, offers himself as a sacrifice.
And what's wild about this is there's an abundance
not just to his wealth, but his abundance to his blood himself.
And Hebrews says that his blood is stronger than the blood of goats, that it's the last sacrifice needed, that Jesus the lion becomes a lamb, led to slaughter, that we might be washed and is ever-flowing blood.
His blood is abundant.
His grace is abundant.
His mercy is abundant.
It never runs out.
So much so, it's almost wasteful.
I would never call Christ blood wasteful, but that's the image that's being put forth.
There's this cup that's constantly overflowing, never failing to cover every one of your sins, both now and anything that you do future, which there will be future sins for you.
And me too, Christ blood has it.
It doesn't run out of power.
It's abundant.
It is strong.
It is mighty.
This is the picture that has been put before us.
That his blood has the power to fix not just you and not just the future you and not just the past you, but the generations to come.
And not just humanity, but this whole world that is broken, the cosmic redemption that seated his blood is the one thing that is abundant and overflowing enough to handle it all.
That is the image that's coming of the one that's going to come through your line, Judah, as abundant in strength, immersing, redemptive power.
His power does not run out.
Jesus is the coming God-lined King who is crucified for His people.
That you might live in His kingdom, be called His sons, His daughters, His cup overflowed, overflows.
It can fix any sin.
It can heal any marriage.
It can fix the decay in your bodies, which
begs at least one question for us.
Like we love these ideas and these hopes, but I have aches in my bodies now, so his blood didn't actually heal the aches in my body.
How does his death, how does his sacrifice actually heal the world when we still experience pain?
How does him dying actually fix this world?
How does being crucified do this?
Well, because he didn't stay dead, did he?
He rose to new life.
And I think in his resurrection, we get a picture for how we get to experience the same thing that he did.
And I think at the end of this, we get a hint.
And this is where I may or may not be stretching a little bit with the imagery, but I'm gonna go with it.
Verse 12, it says, his eyes are darker than wine and his teeth wider than milk.
This is one of the weirder
phrases in this passage like, well, that's not how we talk about eyes and teeth usually.
What's this about?
Well, most people agree at least partly what this is about.
It's about the vitality and strength of this king that you know, when someone's not doing well in life and they're maybe really sick or maybe if you've seen someone on their deathbed, one of the things you notice about them is they have weak eyes.
Their eyes begin to fade.
There's a weakness to them.
This coming king
His eyes darker than wine, meaning they're dark, they're strong, they're mighty, and their teeth are wider than milk, spring to the strength of his teeth, which is a sign of just general health.
From blood-stained cloak to health and vitality, I think at least a little bit gives us a hint of death to life, that this coming king is gonna die
but he's gonna rise again, resurrection.
And why is this important?
It's because this shows us the model and the method for how our world is made new and why we still experience pain in our day to day, although Christ is very much alive, sitting on his throne, working all things to this end.
This is how the world is made new.
Our world follows our great Lion King from death to resurrection.
You have to go through death to get resurrection.
And in our day-to-day lives, we experience many deaths, both physical deaths of seeing people we love die, spiritual deaths of dying to sin.
There's all sorts of deaths that we have to go through.
And not just you and me, but this whole world is going through a birthing process of death and resurrection, and we experience many birthing pains.
But as our king is on the other side of death, risen to new life,
so that it is our future promise.
A promise that you don't get to fully inherit right now, but you will fully inherit one day.
You get glimmers of this hope now.
Now you see through the glass dimly, you get images of this.
When you experience forgiveness, I mean, it's a beautiful image of the gospel that you get to taste of now.
When you come to this table, you get to taste of the forgiveness Christ has for you, the grace that's abundant.
So there's places where we get tastes of this.
But this also ultimately points to the future when we get to taste it fully.
When in death we get to inherit the life that is waiting for us forever.
This tells us that this will happen and it's a surety because our Christ, our savior has gone before us.
He's experienced death and he's risen again and now in him you too will as well.
And so what this is meant to do
is renew our hopes.
We know our hopes that Jesus came as God, as King, and laid his life down that you could have life in him, and his blood is abundant to cover your sin.
And he alone can lead you to the promise of eternal life.
So follow him with much hope.
This is true if you wander into this place that you've never
experience faith in Jesus and you're curious about who this person is.
This is true for you now.
You can, you can call on him by faith and he will be yours and he will cover your sins.
This is also true for you that have walked with the Lord for 50 years.
There's a continual returning to the Lord that we need to have.
We are quick to live by our own strength.
This is telling us the futility of that.
Your blood does not have the strength.
to hold you, but Christ does.
And He will only pours it out for you.
Continually return to it.
Renew your hope.
May we walk in the hope of Christ our Redeemer and of the hope that He will renew our world.
Pray with me.
Holy God, we give you thanks for your mercy and your grace.
I pray that you would renew our hope in you.
To remember your glory, your goodness, your unwavering and abundant mercy that you have for your children, that we will cling to it.
I pray this in your holy name.
Amen.